EP252 blog summary post (#2792)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2026-06-23-quarkus-insights-252-performance-engineering-lessons.adoc

++++

== Performance as a Currency

Francesco opened with a framing device borrowed from economics: performance as currency. The idea, attributed to a MIT professor's lecture, is that performance has no intrinsic value in the same way a feature does, but it has high exchange value — you spend performance to buy features, user experience, and other desirable properties.

The analogy holds because scarcity matters. If you spend more performance than your budget allows, the features you have already paid for stop working. The system becomes unusable.

This matters more now than it did decades ago. Moore's Law delivered free performance gains for a long time, but the era of doubling single-core performance every year is over. At the same time, modern deployments add layers of virtualization, containerization, and cloud abstraction that erode the available budget before an application even starts. Francesco argued that this is precisely when caring about performance stops being optional.

== Why Practice Matters More Than Theory

> Francesco recommended learning from practitioners rather than textbooks and attributed this advice to async-profiler author Andrei Panin: theoretical knowledge fades unless applied immediately to real tasks. He pointed to the surge of practical investigation that followed publication of the benchmark as a concrete example. Problems are the curriculum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Francesco recommended learning from practitioners rather than textbooks and attributed this advice to https://github.com/async-profiler/async-profiler[async-profiler] author Andrei Panin: theoretical knowledge fades unless applied immediately to real tasks. He pointed to the surge of practical investigation that followed https://quarkus.io/blog/new-benchmarks/[publication of the Quarkus benchmark] as a concrete example. Problems are the curriculum.
```

== Lesson 1: Good Data Can Come from Anywhere

A recurring theme was openness to external data. Francesco admitted he tends to dismiss "on my machine I got different numbers" reports — but learned not to. When contributors from outside the Quarkus community, including people from competing projects, shared benchmark results from different hardware, those results revealed real bottlenecks and led to genuine improvements.

The takeaway: reproducible benchmarks invite scrutiny from all directions, and that scrutiny is valuable.

== Lesson 2: Local Benchmarking is Hard — AI Makes it Harder

Running benchmarks on a local machine is unreliable. Background processes compete for resources. Laptop power management distorts results. These problems are well known.

> Francesco noted that AI tools add a new dimension of difficulty. He opened a bug report against Anthropic after observing that Claude Code consumed around 30% of CPU while idle, acting as a noisy neighbor that polluted measurements. When he asked Claude to isolate itself from the benchmark, it did — but also isolated the benchmark into the same CPU affinity group, causing everything to run on a single core. He only noticed three hours later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Francesco noted that AI tools add a new dimension of difficulty. He opened a bug report against Anthropic after observing that Claude Code consumed around 30% of CPU while idle, acting as a noisy neighbor that polluted measurements. When he asked Claude to isolate itself from the benchmark, it did — but also isolated the benchmark into the same CPU affinity group, causing everything to run on a single core. He only noticed three hours into the run.
```

**Distinguish data from information.** Raw benchmark output is data. Information is the conclusion extracted from that data through a documented process. When reading someone else's benchmark, ask whether they are sharing data or the already-processed conclusion — and look for the process in between.

**Avoid anchoring bias.** When only a few samples fit your hypothesis perfectly, do not select only those samples to validate it. Outliers that contradict a hypothesis deserve investigation, not dismissal.

On statistics: Francesco argued for reducing noise in experiments first, so that statistics become less necessary rather than more. This is especially practical for software engineers who need results quickly. When the environment is noisy by nature, some statistics are unavoidable — but controlling the environment is always worth attempting first.

== Lesson 5: Communicate with Humans, Be Wary of LLMs

The mindset section addressed the risk of retreating into an "ivory tower" where an LLM becomes the only sounding board. LLMs agree readily, even when prompted with incorrect positions. They produce confident-sounding explanations linking unrelated data points.

> The value of talking with other people — especially non-experts in the specific area — is the friction. Having to explain a finding to someone who does not already share your assumptions forces clarity and surfaces gaps. Francesco illustrated this with a story about sending a draft blog post to a colleague and being told bluntly that a section did not make sense. It turned out the section really did not make sense.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value of talking with other people — especially non-experts in the specific area — is the friction. Having to explain a finding to someone who does not already share your assumptions forces clarity and surfaces gaps. Francesco illustrated this with a story about sending a draft blog post to a colleague and being told that an explanation did not make sense. It turned out the section really did not make sense.
```

LLMs can still be useful for getting started in unfamiliar territory, but the ownership of the understanding must remain with the engineer. The responsibility for conclusions cannot be delegated.

== Lesson 6: Bugs, Luck, and Doing Your Homework

The final section addressed mindset around root cause analysis:

**Avoid blame without proof.** Early in his career, Francesco's instinct was to blame the operating system, the JVM, or the hardware. He learned to treat that as a last resort requiring evidence. JVM bugs and Linux kernel bugs do exist, but they are uncommon. Claiming one without a reproduction is not useful.

> **Luck is real but not the whole story.** Some discoveries happen because the right conditions align unexpectedly. Francesco acknowledged that finding three significant https://openjdk.org/groups/hotspot/[HotSpot] bugs in a single investigation involved luck — but also deep preparation that made it possible to recognize what he was looking at when the opportunity arose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Luck is real but not the whole story.** Some discoveries happen because the right conditions align unexpectedly. Francesco acknowledged that finding three significant https://openjdk.org/groups/hotspot/[HotSpot] bugs in a short time involved luck — but also deep preparation that made it possible to recognize what he was looking at when the opportunity arose.
```

**Do your homework.** The investigation chain leading to a root cause can be very long. Stopping early because you have run out of familiar territory is tempting. Going deeper, and reaching out to specialists in adjacent areas — JVM teams, OS kernel developers — is how compound discoveries happen.

== Simplicity vs. Performance

> A question from the audience raised the classic trade-off: is it ever right to sacrifice simplicity for performance? Francesco's answer was architectural: good performance should be designed in from the start, not patched in later. Insects are simple and highly effective — he used this as an illustration that simplicity and efficiency are not inherently opposed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A question from the audience raised the classic trade-off: is it ever right to sacrifice simplicity for performance? Francesco's answer was architectural: good performance should be designed in from the start, not patched in later. Consider insects, which are both simple and highly effective — Franz used this as an illustration that simplicity and efficiency are not inherently opposed.
```
